Imagine living in a world without any Bible.
No knowledge of Jehovah or Jesus Christ.
No Jehovah's Witnesses.
No understanding of why we're here or where we're going.
How would you feel?
It's just like the Apostle Paul told the Ephesians when he said,
you had no hope and you were without God in the world.
One Bethelite told me that when he reads these words,
it sends a chill through him.
It makes him feel stone cold.
Well, we can be thankful that we don't live in a world
that Jehovah is unknown.
We don't live in that world, but billions of people do.
I'd like to invite you to turn your Bible's place to Isaiah chapter 60.
And what we're going to see is that the Bible does foretell a time
when the world would be in darkness.
Isaiah 60, and we're going to start with verse 1.
Arise, O woman, shed light for your light has come.
The glory of Jehovah shines on you.
For look, darkness will cover the earth and thick gloom the nations.
But on you, Jehovah will shine.
And on you, his glory will be seen.
Nations will go to your light and kings to your shining splendor.
So how did the world come to be filled with so much darkness?
We know that from the beginning Satan tried to snuff out worship of Jehovah.
And he probably figured that if the world was going to be dark,
he could keep it that way by destroying either Jehovah's people
or Jehovah's word or preferably both.
But Jehovah has shown that he's in full control of matters.
It says here in these verses that he would raise up his woman.
And that nations would go to this light.
And when we think of nations, we think of various countries, cultures, customs, and languages.
And it only stands to reason that in order for these nations to be attracted to this light,
to understand the message, it would need to be made available to them in their language.
Now, Jehovah has shown that it's easy for him to do this.
He can bring the message to people in their own language.
And we're going to look at an example.
This is in Acts chapter 2.
And we're going to look at the account here of some of the things that took place at Pentecost.
Acts chapter 2.
And we're going to start reading with verse 3.
And tongues as if a fire became visible to them and were distributed.
And one of them came to rest on each one of them.
And they all became filled with Holy Spirit and started to speak in different languages,
just as the Spirit enabled them to speak.
At that time, devout Jews from every nation under heaven were staying in Jerusalem.
So when this sound occurred, a crowd gathered and was bewildered.
Because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
Indeed, they were utterly amazed and said, see here.
All of these who are speaking are Galileans, are they not?
How is it then that each one of us is hearing his own native language?
And then down to verse 11, we hear them speaking in our languages about the magnificent things of God.
Yes, they were all astonished and perplexed, saying to one another, what does this mean?
Well, we know that what happened here is in contrast to what Jehovah did at the Tower of Babel.
Because there people were banding together in rebellion against him.
And he did something about it to stop that rebellion.
He erased the knowledge of the language that they knew before and gave them a new language.
But here in this case, in Pentecost, it seems that Jehovah did not erase the language that they knew before.
He just gave them a new one.
But what was Jehovah's purpose here?
Why did Jehovah choose this miracle when he had gathered all of these devout Jews together in Jerusalem?
You see, these devout Jews, probably New Greek, attended the synagogue, they knew the lessons of the Messiah.
But these scriptures tell us they were bewildered, utterly amazed, astonished, perplexed at what they were hearing.
This word, astonished in verse 12, is the same Greek word that's used in Luke the 8th chapter,
when Jeres' 12-year-old daughter was resurrected.
And verse 56 tells us that her parents were beside themselves.
It's a very strong word.
But why did these people have such a strong reaction?
Let's look back at verse 8.
How is it that each one of us is hearing his own native language?
And we're going to take a look at the footnote, and it says,
or the language of his birth.
So you see, this wasn't the language of education for them.
This was the language of the womb.
This is the language that their moms spoke to them in.
And we know that scientists tell us that language development starts in the womb
and that newborns, just a couple of days old, are already crying in the rhythm of the language
that they've been hearing for the last three months in their mother's womb.
So it's interesting that Jehovah chose the language that they started learning in the womb.
This made a very deep impact on them.
You see, Jehovah did this.
He wanted to make this deep emotional impact so that they would go back home to every nation under heaven
and never, ever in their lifetime forget what they saw and heard there at Pentecost.
And they would spread the good news about this to all of the people where they went.
What we learned from this is that Jehovah has power over language.
He used it before and he would use it again.
Now we said before that one of Satan's goals would be to try to destroy Jehovah's people.
So we're going to take a look at some events that show examples of this.
I'd like to invite you, please, to turn to the back of your Bibles to Appendix B9.
And you'll see some maps there and please look at the upper right hand corner of the page.
And you're going to see that gray shaded area is the vast, meadow Persian Empire.
Now while you're looking at that map, I want to just read the first two verses of Esther.
Now in the days of Haseerus, that is the Haseerus who ruled over 127 provinces from India to Ethiopia.
So you see that there on your map in the lower right hand corner of that gray shaded area.
You see that meadow Persian Empire goes all the way down toward India into India.
And in the lower left, the southwest corner all the way down into Ethiopia.
In those days when King Haseerus was sitting on his royal throne in Shushan, the citadel.
And you see that, right? Just about in the middle of the map.
So this creates the setting for these verses that we're going to read.
I'd like to invite you to turn your Bibles now to Esther, the third chapter.
And we're going to start reading at verse six.
We know the story of Esther. Mordecai refused to bow down to Haman.
And Haman was furious.
So let's start reading in verse six.
But he, Haman, despised the thought of doing away with Mordecai alone
for they had told him about Mordecai's people.
So Haman began seeking to annihilate all the Jews
who were in the entire realm of Haseerus, all of Mordecai's people.
And then verse eight, Haman then said to King Haseerus,
there is a certain people scattered and dispersed among the peoples
in all the provinces of your realm, whose laws are different from those of other peoples.
And they do not obey the King's laws, and it is not in the King's interest to let them be.
If it pleases the King, let it decree be written that they be destroyed.
I will pay 10,000 silver talents to the officials to put into the royal treasury.
We can see that his lies and deception misled the King.
Because he said, a certain people, he didn't say who.
They do not obey the King's laws. This was a lie.
And then he said, they should be destroyed.
While in verse 11, King Haseerus said, do with them as you see fit.
Let's continue our reading in verse 12.
The King's secretaries were then called on the 13th day of the first month.
They put in writing all of Haman's orders to the King's safe traps,
the governors who were over the provinces, and the princes of the different peoples,
to each province in its own script, and to each people in its own language.
They wanted to get the word out.
It was written in the name of King Haseerus and sealed with the King's signate ring.
The letters were sent by means of couriers to all the King's provinces,
giving the order to annihilate, to kill, and to destroy all the Jews.
Young and old alike, children and women on a single day,
on the 13th day of the 12th month, that is, the month of Adar,
and to seize their possessions.
So you see, this message, kill the Jews, went viral,
and it meant death for all of Jehovah's servants.
Their goal was complete annihilation.
Now, we've learned that Haman was a descendant of Agag.
And he was likely seeking revenge, because Jehovah had decreed
the eventual extermination of the Malakites, and Agag was one of them.
Now, what we read here in the book of Esther reminds us of what we read in the book,
God's Kingdom Rules.
And there's a nice account on page 93 from our brother, Zikarie Allegbe,
and he talks about the ban against Jehovah's Witnesses in Benin.
And this is what he says, in 1976, when we had 2,300 publishers,
our work was banned, and the government ordered the ban to be broadcast
in every local language.
That was unheard of.
Though Benin's population speaks more than 60 languages,
radio programs back then were usually broadcast in only five.
So you see, in both cases here, they feared the spread of Jehovah's people.
And to ensure success, they felt like they had to get the message out to everyone in their language.
But did it work? Notice what our brother continues to relate.
When the ban was broadcast in all local languages,
many thousands of people living in remote areas heard of us for the very first time.
They wondered, who are Jehovah's Witnesses? And why are they banned?
Later, when we reached those areas, many accepted the truth in short order.
Today, there are more than 11,500 witnesses in Benin.
So you see, their plan backfired.
Their intent was to stop God's people,
but it ended up helping our brothers spread the good news.
This is not what they intended.
Now let's go back to the book of Esther.
And we're going to start again in chapter 8.
We know that Esther risked her life to approach the king.
She exposed Haman's plot to kill the Jews.
Haman was killed. He was hanged on a stake.
But since the king's revoke could not, sorry, his decree,
could not be revoked, he allowed a new command to be written
that would cancel out the documents that Haman sent,
the first ones that went out.
What did these new documents say?
Let's start reading in Esther 8 and verse 11.
In these documents, the king granted permission to the Jews
in all the different cities together together
and defend their lives to annihilate, kill,
and destroy any forces of any people or province
that might attack them, including women and children
and to seize their possessions.
And the scriptures tell us that the Jews defeated all of those
who hated them, not a man could stand against them.
They also killed the ten sons of Haman
and 75,000 others who hated them.
But notice who this second order was sent to.
Let's go to verse 9.
So the secretaries of the king were summoned
at that time in the third month,
that is, the month of Sivan on the 23rd day,
and they wrote all that Mordecai commanded to the Jews
as well as to the seetraps, the governors,
and the princes of the provinces from India to Ethiopia,
127 provinces to each province in its own script.
Or as the footnotes says, in their own style of writing
and to each people in its own language
and to the Jews in their own script and language.
And what do we think of when we think of this word script?
You see the picture here.
We have symbols and characters that are recognizable to us,
our alphabet in English,
and it's basically the same in Spanish, French,
and Western European languages.
Some have accents and dots extra,
but basically all of these are considered the Roman script.
And then, of course, there are others such as Cyrillic
that's used by Russia and the former Soviet republics,
Korean, Chinese, their main language families, Arabic.
So it appears that this decree in the Book of Esther
was translated into scores of languages
and many different scripts,
because they recognized that for everyone to comprehend the message
and to act on it,
it had to be made available to them in their language.
You see, it meant life for the Jews
and the survival of the whole Jewish race.
Just think about what the result would have been
had this satanic plot been successful.
We know that the events in the Book of Esther
concluded by about the year 475 BCE.
So just imagine that at that point
all of Jehovah's servants were killed.
That means after that, no Jewish race,
no walls of Jerusalem rebuilt in 455 BCE,
no book of Malachi written, no Greek scriptures recorded,
no seed of Abraham, no Messiah, where would we be?
This second message of life that went out
had to supersede that first message of death that went out.
It couldn't get to one person less.
Just imagine if you were one of the condemned ones
and you were living in the mountains of Tajikistan,
how important would it be to you
that everyone in your town actually understood the message?
What we want to get from this
is that when it comes to saving people's lives
and to ensure that they're going to act on the message,
it needs to come to them in their own language and script.
And as we saw from what we read in Pentecost,
Jehovah is perfectly capable of delivering that.
Now, when it comes to this message of life,
Satan will do anything he can to block it, to destroy it.
Let's look at some examples of this.
Please turn your Bibles to Jeremiah chapter 36.
And we know that Jehovah told Jeremiah to write in a scroll
a message of warning to the people
that Jerusalem was going to be destroyed
unless they changed their ways.
Now, this message in this scroll was later read
to King Jehovah Kim.
And Jehovah Kim didn't like what he heard.
So he cut the scroll into pieces
and he threw them into the fire.
Well, was that the end of Jehovah's Word?
Let's start reading in Jeremiah 36 in verse 28,
where Jehovah told Jeremiah,
take another scroll and write on it all the same words
that were on the first scroll,
which King Jehovah Kim of Judah burned up.
And down to verse 32,
Jeremiah then took another scroll
and gave it to Barak, the son of Nariah, the secretary,
and that Jeremiah's dictation he wrote on it,
all the words of the scroll that King Jehovah Kim of Judah
had burned in the fire.
And many more words like those were added.
So we see that it turned out exactly as Jehovah foretold,
about 17 years later,
Jerusalem was destroyed.
Many of the rulers were killed,
the people were taken as exiles into Babylon.
But the message that was in that scroll
that Jehovah Kim threw into the fire,
as well as all the circumstances surrounding that event,
were recorded here in the book of Jeremiah
and are preserved till our day.
Now we're going to look at another example,
and I'd like to invite you to turn to the back of your Bible again.
And we're going to look at Appendix A3.
Now, we know that centuries after Jeremiah's time,
Jesus came as the light of the world.
But he did say that an enemy would plant weeds among the wheat.
And that enemy is the devil.
Paul also spoke about the apostasy.
So we're going to read something here.
You're looking at Appendix A3.
You'll see in the middle of the page
a subheading copious, preserved God's Word,
and then count to the third paragraph,
the one that begins with what about the 27 books?
And then in the middle of the paragraph,
Colossians 416, we're going to start reading right after that.
Despite attempts by Roman Emperor Diocletian
and others to destroy all Christian literature,
thousands of ancient fragments and manuscripts
have been preserved until our day.
Well, who was this Roman Emperor Diocletian?
Well, he's someone who started a vicious persecution
against Christians in the year 303 CE.
And it lasted for about eight years.
It was his goal to eradicate Christians.
And one of the first things he did was he decreed
that all the copies of their scriptures be destroyed
because he took it for granted that every Christian community,
wherever they were, had a collection of holy books
that were vital for their survival.
So his men hunted high and low for these books
and they burned them publicly in the marketplaces.
The persecution was intense and barbaric,
and many Christians were maimed and killed.
It was a very difficult time.
So difficult that this time period that ended in 311 CE
is called, even by secular historians,
the great persecution.
Now, it's actually what happened right after this
that catapulted Christianity into darkness.
You see, in 312, Constantine marched on Rome
and he eventually became the Emperor.
The first thing he did was he officially ended the persecution
and he gave back the property to the Christians.
And he gave them special privileges.
Now you can just imagine this was a sweet victory for Christians.
They welcomed Constantine with open arms.
Constantine surrounded himself with Christians
and he called them brothers.
He wanted to unify all of the people in his realm
under one universal religion.
He even wrote a letter to everyone saying
that they should all become Christians.
And so we know that pagan customs and celebrations
were given Christian names and Christian elders
were given the clothing, the status,
the salary and the prestige of the pagan priests.
Now, not all of the Christians,
but very many of them welcomed Constantine.
They embraced his intervention
and they even praised him and said,
you are an angel sent from God for our protection.
Now, these Christians also embraced the masses
of unconverted pagans who flooded into Christianity.
You see, they called themselves Christian,
but they were not genuine disciples of Jesus Christ.
These Christians considered Constantine a Christian,
but he wasn't one.
He was still officially the high priest of Roman paganism.
But he took it upon himself to appoint and remove church leaders.
And in the year 325,
when there was a big dispute about whether God and Jesus
are the same person, they held this council at Nicaea.
And in came the Christians,
some of them named and scarred from all these years
of persecution.
And it was actually Constantine who proposed the wording
and said, God and Jesus are of the same substance.
And when he said that,
many of them were just gasping.
They said, inspired.
They fell for it.
And this is what laid the foundation
for the Trinity doctrine, which came a few years later.
Now, you see, it wasn't the force of diocletian
and the great persecution that was so effective.
He couldn't conquer the Christians,
but it was the embrace of the world that made them fall.
One writer likened it to a great judo throw.
He said, you see, in judo,
you don't have to be bigger and stronger than your opponent.
You just have to push.
And he pushes back.
And when he pushes, you pull and you flip him.
And it's his weight and his strength that sends him.
And it's amazing how far he will go.
Well, diocletian pushed on the church.
Constantine did the pull and the throw.
And the church crashed to the ground.
So that a century later,
it wasn't even recognizable as the Christianity that we know.
Because by then, Christians were characterized
by their violence, their bloodshed,
their political intrigue and envy.
The apostasy was truly entrenched.
And this darkness was so great that this control by Rome
and the church came to be known as the Dark Ages.
And so we know what happened after that.
In centuries, the Inquisitions, the Crusades,
these Christians who were persecuted
became the persecutors.
So how bad is it when even the world calls
the influence of the church darkness?
Remember that Isaiah 60 verse 2 said that darkness
would cover the earth.
Now, another way to restrict the Bible
would be to limit it to just one or two languages.
And we know that's exactly what this church did for centuries.
They forbid church services in any other language
besides Latin for bid Bible translation.
And if you had a Bible,
you could be sent to prison for life
or burned at the stake for doing so.
And this routine continued for centuries
because well into the 1900s,
Catholic priests were still confiscating
Bibles and burning them.
But we know that all of these attacks failed.
And the reason why they were just as successful
as King Jehovah came was when he tried to destroy Jehovah's Word
is because the Bible tells us that Isaiah 40 verse 8
the Word of our God endures forever.
And we know that it's only because of Jehovah's intervention.
Because from the very, very beginning
when the very first scrolls were written,
Jehovah commanded that copies be made.
And professionals skilled scribes and copiasts
made these copies.
And these early scrolls were translated
into other languages, for example,
in the first century the apostles used the Greek Septuagint Bible.
But we also know that Jehovah protected
the integrity of the message itself.
And we know this because we can look at manuscripts
that are just a few hundred years old
and we can compare them with the oldest known manuscripts,
the Dead Sea Scrolls, some of which are more than 2000 years old.
When we compare them, we see that there's no difference
in meaning between them.
The differences in wording are very, very minor.
And that gives us confidence that the contents of the Bible
have not changed from the very beginning.
What's interesting is that these scrolls,
the Dead Sea Scrolls, were right there in a cave in plain sight
in the land of Israel for hundreds and hundreds of years.
All the way till 1943 they weren't discovered.
So why were they not discovered during all those years
down and destroying Jehovah's Word?
Obviously his protection is evident.
And it was Jehovah who would ensure that the Bible
would go on to become the most widely translated,
most widely distributed document in history
because parts of the Bible exist in nearly 2700 languages.
We can see Jehovah has been victorious in this.
And we know it's the Bible that is the key
to help people to learn about God,
to learn to love Him, to serve Him,
to learn about the blessings of living forever in His Kingdom,
the Kingdom of Good News.
And this is what Jesus said,
would be preached in all the inhabited earth
for a witness to all the nations
and then the end would come.
But the Bible also tells us that as we got closer to the end
that life would be very, very difficult.
People would be lovers of themselves, blasphemers,
disobedient without love of goodness,
lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.
So how would the King be able to raise up an army of preachers
during these last days
who would be willing to preach the good news?
Jehovah tells us what His plan was.
Let's turn please to Malachi, the third chapter.
Malachi 3 and verse 1.
This is Jehovah speaking.
Look, I am sending my messenger,
His anointed ones,
and He will clear up away before me.
And suddenly, the true Lord, Jehovah,
whom you are seeking, will come to His temple.
And the messenger of the covenant,
Jesus Christ, will come in whom you take delight.
Look, He will certainly come,
says Jehovah of armies.
So this is telling us that His messenger
would be on the scene well before Christ's presence,
clearing up the way.
And it's history that tells us, that shows us,
there was just one small group of faithful ones active at that time
who stood out as the one and only genuine Christians
who had the privilege of shaking off the legacy that was handed to them,
the layers and layers of false teachings associated with the Bible.
In the beginning, they were so few and things were not clear,
but Jehovah strengthened them.
Organizationally, He cleansed them spiritually,
and He equipped them to preach the good news
and to make genuine disciples.
Now, Jesus made it very clear what their role would be,
as recorded at Matthew 24.45.
Jesus said that He would have a faithful and discreet slave
and appoint him over His domestics to give them their food
at the proper time.
Now, this faithful slave knows that much is at stake,
people's lives, because their commission is the same
as what Jesus told the Apostle Paul, his commission was,
when Jesus appeared to him and blinded him.
As recorded in Acts 26, 18, Jesus told him,
I am sending you to open their eyes,
to turn them from darkness to light,
and from the authority of Satan to God,
so that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and an inheritance among those sanctified by their faith in me.
So, just like in the days of Esther,
the faithful slave understands that they have a message of life
that must be given to each people in its own language
and in their own script.
Now, was this too difficult for Jehovah to accomplish
with this small group of witnesses?
How could they possibly do it?
Well, it says, Jesus said, with men, this is impossible,
but with God, all things are possible.
And so today, what we see is that the good news is being preached
in every nation under heaven,
and it's being translated into more than 700 languages,
and in the eyes of the world,
what is being accomplished by Jehovah's organization
is an impossibility.
And sometimes, maybe even we feel that it's an impossibility.
We may be overwhelmed by all that's being produced
and the results that are being had.
But what is Jehovah's view on this?
Let's turn our Bibles, please, to Zechariah 8.
Zechariah 8.
And we're going to read, starting with verse 6.
This is what Jehovah of armies says.
Although it may seem too difficult to the remaining ones
of this people in those days,
should it seem too difficult also to me?
Declares Jehovah of armies?
This is what Jehovah of army says.
Here I am saving my people from the lands of the east and the west,
or as the footnote says, from the land of the sunrise
and the land of the setting sun.
And I will bring them in, and they will reside in Jerusalem,
and they will become my people,
and I will become their God in truth and in righteousness.
And so we can say, in this year of 2015,
without hesitation that the good news is being preached
around the world from the land of the sunrise
to the land of the setting sun.
The faithful and discreet slave have done things Jehovah's way
and they are reaping his blessings for it.
And it is us that have the privilege of seeing the fulfillment
of Jehovah's purposes.
Now, as an organization, we've been translating for over 130 years,
and we've always used the resources that are available to us.
And I would just like to mention one briefly,
and this is the MEPS system that was developed in the early 1980s.
And back in those days, it was actually impossible.
There was not a way to type very many scripts around the world
into a computer.
You could just do some basic scripts, like Roman script,
and a few others.
But the governing body had the foresight to understand
that we needed to create a computer system, hardware and software
that could bring the message of life to each people
in their own language and in their own style of writing,
in their own script.
And it's still this computer program that's being used to this day
to help publish our literature and to share our information
on our website.
Now, it's interesting, it's just the kind of coincidence,
that all of these languages that you're seeing here
are ones that are spoken today in that area
that you saw in that map earlier, the Meadow Persian Empire.
This is not all of the languages, it's just a few.
But it shows that Jehovah's Word is reaching into every corner of the earth.
Now, though the Bible is available in 2700 languages,
the reality is that many of those languages are dead languages.
They're spoken by people anymore.
And the governing body also understands
that we cannot rely on Bible societies
and the Bible translations that are distributed by them.
Because there are several problems.
Their Bibles are hard to get, they're expensive,
and they are on a mission to eradicate Jehovah's name.
And so now we have the New World Translation available in 128 languages.
It's true, the faithful slave has taken on a tremendous work
with Bible translation.
But what is more important than making the Bible available to people?
You see, it's so easy for us to take it for granted
that we have a Bible in our language.
Because most of us here in the audience have been given a Bible
from the time you were born.
For many of us, it was the New World Translation.
But the reality is that for many of our brothers and sisters around the world,
they went a very long time without having Bibles.
And if they could get a Bible, often,
it was something that used archaic language
where they were just bad translations.
But they still needed to read the Bible every day.
And they would see words like hell and cross.
And they knew these were wrong.
But then they would read other things and say,
I wonder if this is also wrong.
Can I really trust this?
It's as if they're reading the Bible with their foot on the break,
not quite sure if this is what the Bible actually says.
Well, it's as one sister said,
with the New World Translation,
I understand it, and I can trust it.
Now, how many people does it take to get this message of life out
to each people in their own language and in their own script?
About 8 million.
You see, we're all part of one large army of Jehovah's servants,
and we need each other.
But this large army is made up of more than 31,000
who are working at Bethel worldwide.
Now, this figure includes more than 6,300 commuters
and temporary volunteers.
But the point is that it's a collective effort
between all of us along with Jehovah's spirit
that makes this work possible.
And it shows that it's his work because there's no individual
who can take credit for it.
Now, many of you Bethelites are setting a very good example
when it comes to reaching out to people who speak other languages.
For example, here in the United States branch territory,
about 2,400 of you support congregations other than English.
For example, 161 of you support Chinese congregations.
And there are 56 of you who are currently enrolled
in a foreign language class.
You are doing a wonderful work.
We know that it's not as easy if you were just born into that language,
or if you could just pioneer in that language,
it's hard work to learn a language.
But not doubt your efforts are encouraging to others,
and you contribute a lot to the stability of the congregation
that you're supporting.
It takes a lot of work, and we encourage you not to just be satisfied
with learning the basics of a language,
but make it your aim to keep making progress,
to get better and better,
so that you can really be of support to the brothers and sisters.
It can be done.
And really, no matter the language of the congregation that you attend,
we can confidently say to foreigners,
we have literature in your language.
Just like Acts 1727 tells us that people should seek God
that they might grow for him and find him.
And you can just imagine somebody groping for something.
They can't see it, maybe it's dark,
but they understand that it's something within reach,
and they're just trying to feel for it,
and just to see if they can get it.
And the Bible tells us that, yes, people can really find God
if they grow for him.
In fact, he is not far off from any one of us.
And it's amazing that we have so many gifts
to make this message of life accessible.
We have a freshly revised Bible translation.
We have the watchtower in a few simplified languages.
We have songs that touch our hearts.
We have Bible education material for babies, for children,
for teenagers.
We have audio recordings, videos, publications in Braille,
in sign language, internet web pages,
and most of these are available in dozens or hundreds of languages.
We can see that Jehovah doesn't want to leave anybody out.
He wants to make this message of life available to everybody,
no matter what their station and life.
As an example, this brochure has been translated into over 600 languages,
and some could say that it's possibly the most widely translated,
I should say the second most widely translated document in history,
next to the Bible.
Now, we are thankful to the governing body
that all of this spiritual food is made available for free.
Without charge, we're thankful to them for their courage,
especially when it comes to Bible translation,
and restoring Jehovah's name.
And we thank them for not just being concerned with the numbers
like some religions are, they just want to go around and baptize people
so they can count them up and say, we have a lot of members.
But the anointed are genuinely concerned with the quality of our faith,
and they, untiringly, keep encouraging us and cheering us on
to keep our relationship with Jehovah, to not lose our faith.
This planet is now seeing the greatest preaching work
that's ever been done in the history of mankind.
His word has pierced through the darkness,
and conquered all of these obstacles that Satan has put in the way.
It says, if it's just like Isaiah 11, 19 says,
the earth will certainly be filled
with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters cover the sea.
We have so many good things to look forward to.
We know that in the Bible, Jehovah showed his power
in some spectacular ways.
For example, at Babel, or at Pentecost,
or in the days of Esther and Mordecai,
he stopped a genocide in its tracks.
And Jehovah has brought the light of truth to a dark world.
He's preserved his word and his people.
And so we have every reason to believe
at the end of the system of things.
The climax is going to be even more spectacular
than anything Jehovah has ever done before.
How thankful we can be to Jehovah
for allowing us the privilege just to see his hand at work
during these last days.
And how thankful we are that we do not live in a world
where Jehovah is unknown.
And how happy we can be that the good news
is being made known to people, to each people,
in its own language and in their own script.